What is Scanning?
Scanning is a set of procedures for identifying live hosts, ports, and services, discovering the operating system of the target system, and 
identifying vulnerabilities and threats in the network. These scans are typically automated and give an insight into what could be exploited. 
Scanning reveals parts of the attack surface for attackers and allows launching targeted attacks to exploit the system.

Scanning Types:
Scanning is classified as either active or passive based on the degree of intrusiveness to gathering information about a target system or network, 
as explained below:
      Passive Scanning: This method involves scanning a network without directly interacting with the target device (server, computer etc.). Passive 
      			scanning is usually carried out through packet capture and analysis tools like Wireshark; however, this technique only 
			provides basic asset information like OS version, network protocol etc., against the target.
      Active Scanning: Active scanning is a scanning method whereby you scan individual endpoints in an IT network to retrieve more detailed 
      			information. The active scan involves sending packets or queries directly to specific assets rather than passively collecting 
			that data by "catching" it in transit on the network's traffic. Active scanning is an immediate deep scan performed on targets 
			to get detailed information. These targets can be a single endpoint or a network of endpoints.

Scanning Techniques
The following standard techniques are employed to scan a target system or network effectively.

1. Network Scanning
A network is usually a collection of interconnected hosts or computers to share information and resources. Network scanning helps to discover and 
map a complete network, including any live computer or hosts, open ports, IP addresses, and services running on any live host and operating system. Once 
the network is mapped, an attacker executes exploits as per the target system and services discovered. 
For example, a computer in a network with an outdated Apache version enables an attacker to launch an exploit against a vulnerable Apache server.

2. Port Scanning
"In computer networking, a port is a number assigned to uniquely identify a connection endpoint and to direct data to a specific service. At the 
software level, within an operating system, a port is a logical construct that identifies a specific process or a type of network service".
Port scanning is a conventional method to examine open ports in a network capable of receiving and sending data. 
First, an attacker maps a complete network with installed devices/ hosts like firewalls, routers, servers etc., then scans open ports on each live 
host. 
Port number varies between 0 to 65,536 based on the type of service running on the host. 
Port scanning results fall into the following three categories:
	Closed Ports: The host is not listening to the specific port.
	Open Ports: The host actively accepts a connection on the specific port.
	Filtered Ports: This indicates that the port is open; however, the host is not accepting connections or accepting connections as per certain 
			criteria like specific source IP address.
3. Vulnerability Scanning
The vulnerability scanning proactively identifies the network's vulnerabilities in an automated way that helps determine whether the system may be 
threatened or exploited. Free and paid tools are available that help to identify loopholes in a target system through a pre-build database of 
vulnerabilities. Pentesters widely use tools such as Nessus and Acunetix to identify loopholes in a system.




